docs: add build tags for release step and auto trigger release pipeline etc (#3159)
adoptium/temurin-build: RELEASING.md

## OpenJDK Quarterly/New Release Process

- Wait for Red Hat/Oracle to push the GA code to GitHub and announce availability:
  - jdk8u : <https://github.com/openjdk/jdk8u>
    - Announce: <https://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/jdk8u-dev/>
  - jdk11u:  <https://github.com/openjdk/jdk11u>
    - Announce: <https://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/jdk-updates-dev/>
  - jdk17u:  <https://github.com/openjdk/jdk17u>
    - Announce: <https://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/jdk-updates-dev/>
  - jdkXX: <https://github.com/openjdk/jdkXX/>
    - Announce: <https://mail.openjdk.java.net/pipermail/jdk-dev/>

### Lockdown period

During the week before release, Release Champion make changes for preparation:

- Update [releaseVersions](https://github.com/zdtsw/ci-jenkins-pipelines/blob/master/pipelines/build/regeneration/release_pipeline_generator.groovy#L6) with correct incoming release versions.
- Update https://github.com/adoptium/mirror-scripts/blob/master/releasePlan.cfg with expected tag, detail see https://github.com/zdtsw/mirror-scripts/tree/issue/3167#skara-repos-and-processes

> Create release tag on below repositories:

Author: I have two open issues to discuss the naming convention https://github.com/adoptium/ci-jenkins-pipelines/issues/495 https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build/issues/3155
think we need to have those done first, then have something to apply this either as manual step by release champion or an auto way

- temurin-build <https://github.com/adoptium/temurin-build>
- ci-jenkins-pipelines <https://github.com/adoptium/ci-jenkins-pipelines>
- jenkins-helper <https://github.com/adoptium/jenkins-helper>

`temurin-build` and `ci-jenkins-pipeline` share the same tag name,`jenkins-helper` might have a different tag name.

Finally lockdown below repositories

- github-release-scripts <https://github.com/adoptium/github-release-scripts>
- containers <https://github.com/adoptium/containers>
- installer <https://github.com/adoptium/installer>
- mirror-script <https://github.com/adoptium/mirror-scripts>

Only include "critical" fixes (i.e. those which will otherwise cause a build break or other problem which will prevent shipping the release builds).
This stops last minute changes going in which may destabilise things. "installer" repo might have exception due to the fact it requires new version of build.

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Author: That is the part in the "checklist" template: https://github.com/adoptium/adoptium/blob/main/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/release-checklist.md `Enable code freeze bot` section

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Reviewer: I would hope we don't need a "lockdown" any more?

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Author: the lockdown is only needed for git repos like mirror-script, installer, etc 
not for ci-jenkins-pipeline, or temurin-build or helper.

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Author: or do you feel we should remove this part?

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Reviewer: I think we need a clear statement of which repos need locking down? ideally we get that to zero..?

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Reviewer: ah list is above :-)

> If a change has to go in during this "lockdown" period it should be done by posting a comment saying "Requesting approval to merge during the lockdown period. Please thumbs up the comment to approve" in Slack release channel.

Reviewer: i'm ok with that for the moment

3.6-- create --> 3.6.1["jdk17u-release-mac-x64-temurin"]
3.6-- create --> 3.6.2["jdk17u-release-linux-x64-temurin"]
3.6-- create --> 3.6.3["jdk17u-release-<os>-<arch>-temurin"]

3.8-- create --> 3.8.1["jdkXXu-release-mac-x64-temurin"]
3.8-- create --> 3.8.2["jdkXXu-release-linux-x64-temurin"]
3.8-- create --> 3.8.3["jdkXXu-release-<os>-<arch>-temurin"]

```

Disable nightly testing so the release builds aren't delayed by any nightly test runs (set `enableTests : false` in [defaults.json](https://github.com/adoptium/ci-jenkins-pipelines/blob/master/pipelines/defaults.json)). Ensure the build pipeline generator job runs successfully (<https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/job/build-scripts/job/utils/job/build-pipeline-generator/>), and the flag is disabled by bringing up the Build pipeline job and check the  `enableTests` checkbox is unticked.

Add a banner to the website to indicate that the releases are coming in the near future ([Example Changes](https://github.com/adoptium/adoptium.net/blob/main/src/components/Banner.tsx)).

### Steps for every version

### Auto Way

We are in the process of automation release build. Here are the new steps (Switch 19 for your version number):

> 1. Jenkins "release trigger" job (e.g <https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/job/build-scripts/job/utils/job/releaseTrigger_jdk19u/>) runs every hour in the release week to check if new GA tag has been detected in the adoptium's source code repo (e.g <https://github.com/adoptium/jdk19u> This excludes https://github.com/adoptium/aarch32-jdk8u)

Reviewer 2: Runs every hour during release week, and is it disabled otherwise?  If so, is there a step defined somewhere to ensure the releaseTrigger jobs are enabled?

Author: this is set in the jenkins job trigger as `0 H 13-20 1,3,4,7,9,10 *`
Jan, March, April, July, Sep and Oct, run 13th (the weekend before official release for dry-run) - 20th

2. If it finds new GA tag matches expected tag set in mirror-script repo, job triggers release-openjdk19-pipeline (e.g https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/job/build-scripts/job/release-openjdk19-pipeline/) with parameters: `scmReference`.
3. If it couldn't find the correct "_adopt" tag but GA tag has been applied in the upstream Skara source code repo. Several things can check:

- If the appropriate [mirror job](e.g https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/view/git-mirrors/job/git-mirrors/job/adoptium/job/git-skara-jdk19u/) has successfully received the tag. Could be a merge conflict blocking creation of "_adopt" tag.
- If the expectedTag set in "mirror-script" repo is wrong/typo.
- Check "release trigger" job, spot anything abnormal from console log.

"release-openjdkXX-pipeline" can be manually run by Release Champion: set `scmReference` with correct "_adopt" tag.

> 4. For jdk8 aarch32Linux, Release Champione need manually trigger https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/job/build-scripts/job/release-openjdk8-pipeline/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. For jdk8 aarch32Linux, the Release Champion needs to manually trigger https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/job/build-scripts/job/release-openjdk8-pipeline/
```

 -- (if required) the supported platforms table at <https://github.com/adoptium/website-v2/edit/main/src/asciidoc-pages/supported-platforms.adoc> which is the source of <https://adoptium.net/supported-platforms>

3. Publish packages for different OS

  3.1. **[Mac only]** Once the binaries are available on the website you need to update the Homebrew casks. There are 4 casks in total

- [`temurin`](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask/blob/master/Casks/temurin.rb) which always serves the latest release version
- [`temurin8`](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask-versions/blob/master/Casks/temurin8.rb)
- [`temurin11`](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask-versions/blob/master/Casks/temurin11.rb)
- [`temurin17`](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask-versions/blob/master/Casks/temurin17.rb)

An example PR can be found [here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask/commit/4565865e9d7c3d3018ee8aa67803ea68c54dde86). The required SHA sums can be easily updated by `brew bump-cask-pr` command . The separate pull request is required for each version you update. If in doubt reach out to @gdams as he's a maintainer.

>   3.2. **[Linux only]** Once the binaries are available on the website you can begin updating the specfiles for the RPM/DEB/APK files. There are 4 different type of linux installer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3.2. **[Linux only]** Once the binaries are available on the website you can begin updating the specfiles for the RPM/DEB/APK files. There are 4 different types of linux installer
```

Once the PRs to change those files have been merged, the [adoptium-packages-linux-pipeline](https://ci.adoptopenjdk.net/job/adoptium-packages-linux-pipeline_new/) job needs to be kicked off. It is recommended to run it without the UPLOAD checkbox to begin with as a 'dry-run' before re-running with the `UPLOAD` checkbox ticked to publish to our JFrog artifactory instance.

4. **[Docker Hub]** The information on updating the Adoptium official dockerhub repository is at <https://github.com/adoptium/containers#maintenance-of-dockerfiles> at the moment you cannot do this until all Linux architectures and windows64 are published for the appropriate version

5. Publicise the Temurin release

- Via slack on the Adoptium #release channel

> - Find someone with the appropriate authority (Carmen, George, Martijn, Shelley, Stewart) to post a tweet about the new release from the Adoptium twitter account

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Find someone with the appropriate authority (Carmen, George, Martijn, Shelley, Stewart, Tim) to post a tweet about the new release from the Adoptium twitter account
```

- [jdk-dev](https://mail.openjdk.java.net/mailman/listinfo/jdk-dev)
- [jdk-updates-dev](https://mail.openjdk.java.net/mailman/listinfo/jdk-updates-dev)

> When this occurs, usually a TSC member will create the `jdk<version>u` update repository ([example of the JDK11u one](https://github.com/adopium/openjdk-jdk11u)) via our Skara mirroring jobs that pull in the commit and tag info from the Mercurial repository. To find out more about Skara and our other mirroring jobs, see <https://github.com/adoptium/mirror-scripts>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When this occurs, usually a Temurin committer will create the `jdk<version>u` update repository ([example of the JDK11u one](https://github.com/adopium/openjdk-jdk11u)) via our Skara mirroring jobs that pull in the commit and tag info from the Mercurial repository. To find out more about Skara and our other mirroring jobs, see <https://github.com/adoptium/mirror-scripts>.
```
